---
layout: page
title: Damage and supershear transition
permalink: /topics/ssdamage-en
published: true
---

{% include usemath.html %}

<div class="pagewidth">
<div id="sectionbtnlst">
   <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/topics/ssdamage-en/">English</a>
   <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/topics/ssdamage-fr/">Français</a>
</div>

<h2 align="center" style="color:#4181BD; font-size:18pt">Signature of transition to supershear rupture speed in coseismic off-fault damage zone</h2>	

<button class="accordion">Authors & Affiliations</button>
<div class="panel">
<div class="columntxtauthors">

Jorge Jara$^{1}$, Lucile Bruhat$^{1}$, Marion Y. Thomas$^{2}$, Sol\`ene L. Antoine$^{3}$, Kurama Okubo$^{4}$, Esteban Rougier$^{5}$, Ares J. Rosakis$^{6}$, Charles G. Sammis$^{7}$, Yann Klinger$^{3}$, Romain Jolivet$^{1,8}$ and Harsha S. Bhat$^{1}$<br><br>

1. Laboratoire de Géologie, Département de Géosciences, Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS, UMR 8538, PSL Université, Paris, France<br>
2. Institut des Sciences de la Terre de Paris, Sorbonne Université, CNRS, UMR 7193, Paris, France<br>
3. Université de Paris, Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, CNRS, 75005 Paris, France<br>
4. National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Resilience, 3-1 Tennnodai, Tsukuba 305-0006, Ibaraki, Japan<br>
5. EES-17 – Earth and Environmental Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA<br>
6. Graduate Aerospace Laboratories, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, 91125, USA<br>
7. Department of Earth Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA<br>
8. Institut Universitaire de France, 1 rue Descartes, 75005 Paris, France

<br> <br>
</div>
</div>

<div class="panel">
<p><b>Hazardous tsunamis are known to be generated predominantly at
subduction zones by large earthquakes on dip (vertical)-slip faults.
However, a moment magnitude, $M_w$, 7.5 earthquake on a strike
(lateral)-slip fault in Sulawesi (Indonesia) in 2018 generated a tsunami
that devastated the city of Palu. The mechanism by which this large
tsunami originated from a strike-slip earthquake has been debated.

Here we present near-field ground motion data from a GPS station that
confirms that the 2018 Palu earthquake attained supershear speed, i.e.,
a rupture speed greater than the speed of shear waves in the host
medium. We study the effect of this supershear rupture on tsunami
generation by coupling the ground motion to a 1D non-linear
shallow-water wave model that accounts for both the time-dependent
bathymetric displacement and velocity. With the local bathymetric
profile of the Palu bay around a tidal gauge, we find that these
simulations reproduce the tsunami motions measured by the gauge, with
only minimal tuning of parameters.

We conclude that Mach (shock) fronts, generated by the supershear speed
of the earthquake, interacted with the bathymetry and contributed to the
tsunami. This suggests that rupture speed should be considered in
tsunami hazard assessments.</b></p>
</div>

</div>
